# Executive Summary 

The white paper entitled ‘Agility – a new buzzword, or an ability, required by organisations for their survival in the digital era?’ casts light on the new economic conditions questioning traditional forms of organisation and culture as well as traditional models of control. Often the solution, we are told, is agility. But what lies behind this concept, and what purpose does it serve?

In the 21st century, the data-driven companies of internet economy achieve the biggest profits. The exponential growth of information, knowledge, computer performance, and data storage capacity is leading to the disruption of entire industries. In this regard, platforms are the predominant business model. Companies are thus increasingly obliged to ask themselves how they should make use of technological progress to become part of digitalisation. But they must also take other considerations into account, for example cultural transformation, the increasing alienation of human beings in hierarchical organisations, and a growing need for meaningful work. Agile companies seem particularly well-suited to deal with increased complexity, because they perceive uncertainty as a resource and achieve greater productivity against the background of internal self-organisation. Agility combines numerous theories, organisational models and methods, helping companies to challenge rigid hierarchies and processes. In this context, agility does not mean the absence of rules – on the contrary, a company achieves agility through an exceptionally productive combination of stability and flexibility. The development of an agile mindset and agile structures calls for a new understanding of leadership and management. An organisation, wishing to become more agile, must query the status quo on the levels of attitude, structures, and networking both within the organisation and outside. The important thing is to identify the areas which, in view of new market requirements, need a more flexible design.
:--- KEYSTATEMENT ---:
Agile companies seem particularly well-suited to deal with increased complexity, because they perceive uncertainty as a resource.
:--------------------:

